The course tutor asked us all to imagine
our client had turned up late to therapy
claiming the trains were disrupted.
She invited us to suggest other possible reasons
for this lateness.
One student suggested it could be an act of
passive aggression.
Maybe the client was angry with us.
Another student suggested
it might be a self-worth issue.
Some clients don’t feel they deserve to
have any time spend on them.
Someone else suggested the client might be
scared of personal change
and their lateness could be an unconscious
attempt to sabotage the therapy.
These and other speculations about the client’s
ulterior motives
all received an approving nod from the tutor.
When the suggestions ran dry
I added what seemed an obvious final reason:
Maybe the trains were disrupted,
just like the client said.
The tutor frowned and said, ‘No.’
She said we always had to assume the client
had some motive.
I was mystified. I said trains do get delayed.
Cars do break down.
Sometimes things happen outside of our control
to make us late.
But she dismissed the point and repeated
that we always had to assume personal motives.
I said when we assume personal motives that
might not exist
we risk attributing our clients with imaginary
issues they don’t possess.
That’s not assisting them — that’s actively
adding to their problems.
The tutor suddenly threw her hands up
and shouted:
‘If I don’t assume my clients have unconscious
motives I can’t work with them!’
I said of course she could work with clients
without making assumptions.
I said she could just openly
check out with them
whether there might be other reasons behind
their lateness.
She could ask how they were feeling about
the therapy sessions.
Give them an opportunity to discuss
any reservations or concerns in an open way.
But it was crucial to be open to the idea
that their excuses for being late
could be genuine.
I reminded her of a sentiment
often attributed to Freud:
‘Sometimes a cigar is just a cigar.’
Sometimes things are just what they seem
with no hidden meaning or symbolism.
She sat in silence for a long time,
gazing at the wall.
People in the group looked at each other bemused
wondering what was going on with her.
Finally she turned back to the group
and moved on to the next exercise.
As if nothing had happened.
It was just another in a series of jarring
outbursts by various staff members
on a therapy course I attended
a few years ago.
I was already a qualified therapist
at the time
and I’d taken the course purely to build
on my existing experience.
Other students who hadn’t yet qualified
had more at stake.
Around a third of the group ended up leaving
the course
in response to continued misconduct and ethical
violations by the staff.
We were repeatedly directed
to diagnose our clients
with bogus psychological issues.
Despite zero medical training,
staff directed us
to assume our clients’ physical illnesses
were purely psychosomatic
and to keep clients in therapy at all costs
even when they indicated
they were ready to end.
We were told to warn them against the dangers
of leaving therapy prematurely
and falling back into old destructive patterns.
When students disputed
the training centre’s practices
staff members suggested
they had psychological issues
that they should discuss with a therapist.
The place was rife with imaginary defects.
Of course it’s part of everyday life
that we sometimes get accused of having flaws
without any good evidence.
But in certain arenas, these accusations pack
more of a punch.
Therapy’s one.
Religion is another.
The manipulations found in the realm of religion
are nothing special.
They’re just more highly structured
and cloaked in a sense of untouchability called
holiness
which is itself a manipulation designed to
silence dissent.
They’re also more magnified.
The same religions that piously condemn gambling
induce us to gamble our entire lives
on their unsubstantiated accounts of the universe.
This religious wager extracts immeasurably
more from us
than a flutter on the horses.
One of the biggest religious hustles
is to persuade us there’s something implicitly
wrong with us.
Christianity claims we all bear the stain
of the original sin
committed by the mythical first humans
Adam and Eve
when they disobeyed the Christian god
by eating from the tree of the knowledge of
good and evil.
Islam rejects the original sin story of its
Abrahamic predecessor
but still depicts humans as inherently imperfect
and emphasises the constant need to atone
and seek divine forgiveness.
Its founder Muhammad outlined various ways
to gain forgiveness.
One involves what’s called the night of
decree or night of power
that occurs in the fasting month of Ramadan.
Muhammad claimed the Islamic god,
Allah, would forgive
all the previous sins of people who prayed
throughout this night.
The catch was he didn’t specify
the date it fell on.
Followers were told it was one
of the odd nights
of Ramadan’s last ten days.
Some Islamic scholars openly admit
this vagueness about the night of power
is designed to get people to worship
throughout the month
in the hope of catching it.
But even the most dedicated worshippers
can have all their acts of devotion erased
on a whim.
In his book Major Sins
revered 13th-century writer Imam Dhahabi
explains the sin of ‘feeling secure from
Allah’s devising’.
He claimed folks who think
they’ve qualified for paradise
can have their destination
deliberately overwritten by Allah
when paradise is a mere arm’s length away.
Some apologists say this is just a warning
to individuals who indulge in sins
on the assumption they’ll be
automatically forgiven
if they fulfil their worshipping obligations.
But Dhahabi points to a more far-reaching
interpretation
that implicates everyone.
Anyone — good or bad — who dares
to feel secure
about their place in paradise can be made
to sin by Allah
right at the last minute and sent to Hell.
Dhahabi says Allah can choose to make someone
agreeable, disagreeable, willing or hateful
and cites Muhammad’s claim
that a person’s heart
is held between Allah’s fingers who can
change it whenever he likes.
What’s being encouraged here is a state
of perpetual insecurity.
People are told they’re
psychologically sick
manipulated into chasing
endless religious therapy
kept endlessly guessing about whether the
therapy’s worked
and warned that bad things could happen
if they dare to think they’re doing ok.
Joseph Smith, founder of the Christian offshoot
Mormonism
also rejected the Christian story
of original sin.
He said people would be punished for their
own sins
not Adam’s transgression.
And of course there’s no justice
in punishing people for the transgressions
of others.
But there’s also no justice
in punishing people
for things that cause no harm to others.
Just like other religious groups,
Mormonism denounces a range
of harmless activities as ‘sinful’.
Sadly, when religious leaders
label something a sin
many followers never question whether there’s
a valid basis for that label.
Instead they actively try to justify the label.
Pick any random activity.
Singing. Painting. Using umbrellas. Space travel.
Label it a sin and notice how easy it is
to find spurious reasons to condemn it.
When we learn to accept spurious reasons
as a basis for our thinking
religious leaders can apply the sin label
to whatever they like
and we fall unthinkingly in line.
Which is how perfectly reasonable, healthy,
positive practices
become poisoned
with illegitimate guilt and shame.
One area many religions have successfully
stigmatised is sex.
Mormon leaders classify many natural sexual
expressions
including solitary, same-sex and straight
pre-marital activity
as the gravest kinds of sin.
They even condemn sexual thoughts
embodying Orwellian thoughtcrime.
Virginity is venerated and non-virgins get
compared to used chewing gum.
Ex-Mormons have reported religious lessons
in which groups are invited to help themselves
to a tray of cupcakes
one of which has been openly
licked by the teacher.
When it’s the last to get picked, the point’s
made:
No one wants spoiled goods.
But does this demeaning analogy stand up?
In a 2016 paper for the Journal of Sex Research
titled ‘Has Virginity Lost its Virtue?’
Amanda Gesselman and colleagues found that
sexually experienced individuals
held more appeal
as prospective romantic partners.
Even inexperienced individuals preferred
a degree of experience in their mate.
It seems non-virgins are often perceived as
bigger cupcakes.
Not licked ones.
Of course, the cupcake analogy is a red herring.
Instead of making a moral argument, it just
stigmatises people.
Any activity — good or bad — can be stigmatised.
Immorality isn’t defined by stigma.
Murder and theft aren’t considered immoral
because they’re socially unpopular
but because they involve identifiable harm.
Without clear evidence of harm
the case against premarital sex fails.
Manipulative groups often use analogies
to try and short-circuit our thinking.
But just like fact claims, analogies need
scrutiny too.
Mormon puritanism isn’t only reserved for
pre-marital sex.
In a 1982 letter to its presidents and bishops
the Mormon office of the First Presidency
said married couples who were guilty
of unnatural, impure or unholy practices
including oral sex
shouldn’t enter the temple before repenting
and discontinuing such practices.
Other religious leaders have also tried to
interfere with marital sex.
Muhammad condemned anal sex
between married Muslims.
Leaders in the Jehovah’s Witness organisation
initially ruled that oral sex within marriage
warranted expulsion.
It then rescinded this ruling
conceding these marital intimacies were none
of its business
— only to make it an expellable offence
again a few years later.
Countless people struggle with unwarranted shame and anxiety
because of stigmatising religious doctrines.
When people claim you’re defective, don’t
accept analogies.
Don’t accept stigma.
Don’t accept charges of sinfulness.
All these things can be applied to absolutely
any activity.
Ask for evidence.
If evidence isn’t forthcoming,
the discussion is over.
An area of
life where evidence is available is discrimination:
the unjust, prejudicial treatment of people
especially based on group categorisations.
Some discrimination is brazen and unapologetic.
Other kinds are more covert.
As children, many of us learn to recognise
the sly unspoken subtleties of discrimination.
My parents repeatedly terminated my friendships
with certain children
but they’d never admit the reason
was skin colour.
Instead they took refuge in insinuations
labelling my friends ‘unseemly’, ‘not
respectable’ and a ‘bad influence’.
Of course children soon learn
to decode this language.
When funny, warm, polite children are labelled
a bad influence
doesn’t take long to identify the real issue.
Some time ago, I was told about
a psychological test
designed to address more covert forms of discrimination.
It was called the Implicit Association Test
or IAT
and its creators claimed
it measured ‘unconscious bias’.
When I took some of these tests online
I could see some huge conceptual problems.
When I got my results
I noticed the creators included a disclaimer
stating these weren’t definitive assessments.
But months later, I was disturbed to discover
the IAT was already being used in workplace
diversity training packages.
The term ‘unconscious bias’ has two very
distinct usages.
One simply refers to observable behaviour
that lies outside our awareness.
For example a teacher might favour
some students over others
without realising it.
Here, we can show people
evidence of their bias
giving them a chance to understand and address
the problem.
The second usage refers to bias
that lies outside the person’s awareness
and for which there’s no observable evidence.
When people don’t experience biased thoughts
or display biased behaviour
allegations of bias become a matter of faith
leaving people unable to understand
or address the supposed problem.
The IAT comes under this second usage.
The IAT is a reaction time test.
It takes a single human characteristic
like skin tone, sexuality,
gender, weight, age
and splits it into two categories.
For example, age is split into young or old.
Subjects have to categorise various images
and words
as fast as they can using two keys on a keyboard.
In some trials images of young people and
good words
are assigned to one key
and images of old people and bad words to
the other.
In other trials, young people and bad words
are assigned to one key
and old people and good words to the other.
Faster reaction times to certain pairings
like old people and good words
are taken as an indicator of unconscious bias
in that direction
and a predictor of real-world discrimination.
Two crucial concepts
underpin psychological tests:
reliability and validity.
Reliability concerns a test’s ability
to produce consistent results.
One type of reliability
called test-retest reliability
looks at whether people who take the test
twice show consistent results.
The highest reliability score is 1.
The lowest is zero.
A value of .8 or higher shows a good level
of reliability.
The creators of the IAT have put its test-retest
reliability at between .5 and .6.
They’ve acknowledged this poor reliability
risks high rates of error.
If our goal is fair treatment
then classifying people as biased or fair-minded
when they’re not is going in exactly the
wrong direction.
Validity concerns whether a test measures
what it claims to measure.
The IAT’s creators claim
the test measures attitudes.
But, as researchers have pointed out
even if it measures psychological associations
which is questionable in itself
associations aren’t equivalent to personally
endorsed attitudes.
They might simply reflect
an awareness of stereotypes.
The creators further claim the test predicts
real-world discrimination.
But even they admit to
an extremely low correlation of 0.24
between the race IAT and discriminatory behaviour.
In 2017, a team of practitioners in psychiatry
and emergency medicine
reviewed various studies in which the IAT
was used to investigate bias among physicians.
Of the nine studies reviewed
seven found no influence on clinical decision-making.
The other two showed confounding results.
For example, Alexander Green and colleagues
found physicians who scored low on race IAT
indicating low bias
showed a big disparity
in their treatment decisions.
They were far more likely to offer
a certain effective coronary disease treatment
to black patients
than they were to white patients.
Meanwhile, high scorers on race IAT
predicted to show pro-white bias
treated both groups roughly equally.
A 2012 Psychological Science paper by Jacquie
Vorauer
found that subjects who completed a race IAT
behaved cautiously in subsequent intergroup
interactions
limiting their self-disclosure, and seeming
potentially unfriendly or aloof.
These kinds of anxieties and conflicts
are predictable
when people are told
they have psychological flaws
without being given any sound evidence.
They’re left in an overly vigilant state
second-guessing all of their responses.
Discrimination is not imaginary.
It exists in overt and covert forms.
But demonstrably unreliable tests
like the IAT
which generate false predictions about discrimination
only serve to muddy the waters.
We’ll always find people
suggesting we’re flawed.
But in certain areas of life
like therapy, religion and the workplace
those suggestions can carry undeserved authority.
When we’re given observable evidence of
harmful behaviour
then we have something to explore
but not when we’re faced with mere stigma
and assumptions.
There’s no reason to entertain
imaginary defects.